---
title: 'Ho Ho Sombrero'
thumbnail_media: 'ho_ho_sombrero-header.webp'
tags: ["devlog", "technical devlog", "jam"]
date: 2021-12-27 14:00:00
emoji: "🐣"
---

Welcome to my devlog for the game ["Ho Ho Sombrero"](https://pandaqi.itch.io/ho-ho-sombrero)

At the start of December, the "New Horizons" game jam came on my radar.
Even though I'd already done *two* huge game jams in November, and
wasn't really looking to do another, the theme just resonated with me:
make a game that's *positive* and about *new year's resolutions*.

This is the game I made for it. Below you can read all about how it came
to be, why I made certain decisions, and hopefully it's both
interesting, fun and educational to read :)

## What's the idea?

Well, yeah, that was a real problem. I was quite busy, so I wasn't able
to come up with some semblance of an idea before the jam started. I
waited one or two days, but nothing really came to mind.

So I started brainstorming. Quickly I realized I wanted to do something
with "eggs": they signal a "new beginning", they could be a metaphor for
your wishes/desires/dreams coming true, it felt fitting.

But it felt too "thinky". I already did some puzzle games recently, and
didn't want to add another one about collecting/hatching eggs.

I kept brainstorming. Then I realized that I didn't have much time left
and should do something simple. Something silly. Something "childish",
perhaps.

That's when I wrote down the second idea: *you're just trying to keep
something in the air*. (When it touches the ground, you lose.)

A few minutes later, I realized I could combine these ideas:

-   You're trying to deliver eggs from A to B

-   You must keep them in the air, because they'll break if they touch
    the ground.

And that became the initial idea!

## Making it unique

Delivering stuff, or keeping it from breaking/falling/dying, isn't new
to games. So I wanted a twist on the concept.

Eggs have quite a unique shape, making them really hard to catch,
bouncing all over the place. This indicated (to me) that this should be
a *physics-based game*, with proper eggs that realistically bounce
around.

Instead of just *grabbing an egg* and moving it ... **the player has no
hands!**

In my head, I envisioned this concept of:

-   Players have *huge* rectangular heads

-   Use them to bounce the egg up, keeping it from hitting the ground.

-   Until it falls into some *egg basket* ( = it's delivered)

So I made that. And then I realized: this is *way too hard*.

I tried the following things:

-   Make eggs bigger => good for clarity, but there's a limit here,
    after which the screen just becomes an ugly mess :p

-   Give eggs slower gravity => fixes the issue, but makes the game feel
    slow and boring, and doesn't match the player speed

-   Make players way faster => again, fixes the issue, but there's a
    limit after which players are just zooming around the field and you
    don't know what's going on

-   Make their head bigger => yes, it's easier to save eggs, but only if
    it's *so big* that the proportions look *very weird*

-   Give them something else, like a racket or frying pan, to save eggs
    => actually a great idea, but not as the *core concept* of the game,
    more like a powerup.

Then I realized I was thinking the wrong way.

Why does it *have* to be the player's head? Why can't it be a ... **huge
sombrero?**

I gave players a huge disc on their head, and the game instantly became
more fun and playable. (The 3D model comes later, for now it's just grey
cylinders and cubes.)

But it wasn't enough. Yes, you can *save* an egg from falling ... but
you can't *steer* it. The eggs keep bouncing however they like, and you
just have to hope they land in the right spot :p

Luckily, the "sombrero" theme gave the answer. If I add a round "ball"
or "hill" in the center of the disc, you can use that to send eggs
whichever way you like.

And that's how we got here:

-   Players are just a huge sombrero, mostly flat, but with a ball in
    the middle.

-   Eggs do nothing special and just follow physics laws.

-   Your job is to keep them off the ground and make them land inside
    the egg basket.

{{< video src="vid1.webm" >}}
    First prototype of game idea
{{< /video >}}

## Creating Eggs

I knew I wanted many different *types* of eggs with *patterns* on them.
(Like chocolate eggs you eat during Easter.)

The *inefficient* way to do this, would be to duplicate each egg, assign
a new material, and repeat the process 20 times.

The *efficient* way to do it, is this:

-   Grab the default cube in Blender

-   Scale down the top face

-   Give it a *subdivision surface* modifier => now it looks like an
    egg!

-   However, because it's still just a cube, the UV-map is easy to work
    with!

-   I created a texture with the pattern for each egg, in a neat grid
    layout.

-   In the game, I simply *offset* the UV coordinates to select which
    pattern I want.

This way, we only need *one model* and *one material*, yet we can get
infinite visually appealing eggs!

## Destroying Eggs

I also knew I wanted a proper *break* animation when eggs hit the
ground.

Again, we can do this quite easily in Blender:

-   Activate the "Cell Fracture" add-on.

-   Duplicate the original egg (with the right UV coordinates)

-   While selected, SHIFT+R, search for the fracture add-on, and click
    it.

-   Apply it. (You can play with the settings, but I saw no need.)

Now you have an egg divided into several chunks. The original UV
coordinates are maintained, so it still looks the same.

All the *extra faces* that have been created needed to be mapped again,
so I just gave them all a solid color. (The same as the egg itself.)

I imported this to Godot, generated a collision shape for each mesh
(using Godots automatic tools for that), and put mesh + shape inside a
RigidBody.

Now I had an egg ... but scattered among 8 separate bodies! Which is
what I wanted!

When an egg hits the ground, we instantiate the "BrokenEgg" scene, with
the same position/rotation as the original egg, and the same pattern.

For an even nicer effect, we apply a random force to all the parts, to
really scatter it.

Cool! I'll have to check in with performance as the game grows, but it
seems fine for now.

## Level Layout

I struggled with the layout of the levels ( = world/arena you play in).

Here's the thing:

-   Eggs shouldn't fly off-screen all the time. They should be contained
    within the level.

-   But adding invisible walls is annoying, as you don't know exactly
    *when* an egg will bounce, or *where* players can move.

-   But adding visible walls, well, *obstructs what you're doing* (and
    looks ugly).

After some thinking, I realized I should integrate the walls with the
level design.

What do I mean with that? I should create an environment *around* the
level, that looks natural, but has the extra purpose of keeping you
locked in. So, not an invisible wall, but a series of blocks and trees
and other things that don't look out of place.

In fact, I found this crucial enough to work on right now. (While
testing, it became *really annoying really quickly* that eggs would
bounce against invisible walls and I didn't know where I could walk.)

Having never done something like this before (in fact, this is one of my
first 3D games), I just gave it my best shot.

{{< video src="vid2.webm" >}}
    Different egg types, trying a better arena
{{< /video >}}

The good news? Yes, it works way better! You know exactly where the
level stops, eggs bounce back predictably. (The invisible wall is still
present, just farther away, to catch the eggs that *really* go flying.)

The bad news? It doesn't really *look* great ... yet. This might be
because of:

-   Colors

-   Lack of actual environment (trees, rocks, etc.)

-   Scale (it feels like the tiles should be two times bigger, to match
    better with the players and eggs.)

But those are worries for later, let's continue with more essential
stuff!

**Remark:** For those wondering how I did this. In Blender, I just gave
the cube some grass on top and dirt pattern on the side. Then I
duplicated the cube a bunch of times and made adjustments: a slope, a
steeper slope, etc. Exported it, turned into a MeshLibrary in Godot
(there are tutorials for that online), and used that in a GridMap to
draw a semi-random environment.

## Obstacles

Creating this level *did* give me an extra idea though. Why give the
players a *flat, blank, rectangular* playing field?

Isn't it way more interesting if the field itself *also* had certain
obstacles, variations, items that you might use?

There could be a *slope* that bounces eggs in a less predictable way.
There could be a *pillow* you can shove around, which can safely catch
eggs of course. There might just be small rocks and plants that can get
in your way when walking around.

It would bring more life to the arena, both in *visuals* and *gameplay*.

So far, I've just written down a list of ideas, but haven't implemented
anything yet. I don't think that's the priority right now.

## The simplification step

If you've read other devlogs of mine, you know this step always arrives:
we have a basic concept, we have many possibilities/ideas that could be
fun ... but we can't throw them *all* into the game and expect people to
understand it.

Let's simplify instead.

### Step 1: powerups

One thing this game surely needs are *powerups* (or *something* to
change physics properties and play with them). But I don't just want to
randomly place some floating icons in the level.

(Why? It would require players to learn even *more* icons. It would be
random, players have no say in what they will get. It would feel
tacked-on.)

Instead, let's **make the eggs the powerups!**

Here's the idea:

-   There are different types of eggs. (Indicated by their
    color/pattern.)

-   If an egg *breaks*, it reveals its powerup. Now it becomes a
    floating icon of that egg, and you can grab it.

-   If an egg *is delivered*, well, nothing more happens.

Why do I think this is a good idea?

-   Breaking things *still* gives you a way forward. (Helps with the
    theme of "positivity" and "new beginnings")

-   There's a strategic choice here: do you want to deliver an egg, or
    break it for its powerup?

-   There's only *one* list of things in this game, and that's the list
    of eggs that can appear. Their icon/pattern/color stay constant. (In
    fact, I'm thinking about teaching nothing up-front, and just showing
    the eggs currently in the game in the top-right corner.)

### Step 2: buttons

Over the years, I've learned that every extra button is one too many.
(At least, if you're aiming for accessibly, family-friendly, coop games
like I do.)

So I want this game to be playable *just* by moving around (and thus
learning the arrow keys/joystick on controller).

However, actions like *jumping* or *dashing* seem quite essential to a
game like this. So I still want to add them and make them easy to
execute.

How do we do that? Well, we **make actions (that need a button press)
powerups as well!**

You can only jump once you've grabbed the *jump* powerup. When you have
it, the icon appears above your head, *plus* the button you need to
press.

This means no explanation up-front, and a constant reminder in-game if
you can do something.

I'll have to see if this isn't just annoying (because you can't jump if
you don't have the powerup), but it's a good idea to keep for now.

### Step 3: summarizing the game

Let's do a check for simplicity by summarizing the game.

-   Objective? Deliver X eggs.

-   How? Move around and hit them, so they *don't* hit the ground, but
    *do* land in a basket.

-   They hit the ground? They break and their powerup can be grabbed.

Any other input is shown when needed. What eggs do is shown in the
corner (for all eggs chosen for *that* particular game.)

I think that's quite simple enough.

{{< video src="vid3.webm" >}}
    This video is from a later stage in development, but it's here to break up the wall of text
{{< /video >}}

## The physics-control step

And as with all *physics-based* games, there comes a time where you must
take some control back into your own hands and restrict the physics
system from doing stupid stuff.

(Completely realistic physics are, in most games, not fun or interesting
at all.)

These are tiny things that made a huge difference for this game:

-   Whenever an egg hits something, its bounce is *increased*. (By quite
    a large factor.)

-   Not just that, the *upward* component is also increased. (So eggs
    will mostly bounce up into the sky, giving you more time and a
    clearer view of where they will land.)

-   Their maximum speed is limited, just in case something odd happens.
    (Don't want eggs flying off the field with the speed of light!)

-   On egg baskets, all bounce code is *turned off*. (Otherwise, eggs
    could easily bounce *out* of it again, or hit the rim and fly all
    the way across the field.)

-   Players have a way higher gravity than eggs (or any other elements).

-   There's no realistic damping. Player movement is dampened/stopped
    quite harshly using my own code, otherwise you get a "slippery
    slidy" player controller that just makes this game impossible to
    play.

There'll probably be many more things as we go. These are just examples
of what you can do to make physics-based games a bit more controlled,
instead of random and frustrating.

## Creating the content

And now's the moment where I just buckle down and *implement all those
ideas I have*. Throw everything against the wall and see what sticks.

This means:

-   Drawing a unique (recognizable) egg pattern

-   Assigning some powerup or specialty to it

-   Revealing it when the egg breaks + making it "pickupable"

-   Creating the functionality in-game for it

Repeat a bunch of times, until I run out of ideas. (Also, preferably,
the egg pattern would be a *hint* towards its functionality. The jump
egg gets an arrow pointing up, for example.)

## Casual Testing

While doing this, I constantly test the game of course, which yielded
the following observations.

### Levels & Environment

About the level layout and environment ...

-   If we're going to spend so much time creating an environment
    *around* the arena ... why not make the whole arena a unique
    environment?

-   The game could have a handful of "levels": one in the desert, one in
    the forest, one in the city. Each would use that same GridMap as
    before *for the whole thing*, and then add new models on top.

-   This way, I can also get more creative with my boundaries. Instead
    of "invisible walls", the boundaries of the level could just be
    *buildings*, or a *tree line*.

(Also, I updated the core tileset to be *bigger* and have more saturated
*colors*, and it already makes it look way better.)

### Core Gameplay

-   Getting the egg inside the basket is *really hard*. (No matter how
    big I make the basket and your sombrero for controlling the eggs.)

-   The basket is also quite *high* right now, which means it's easy to
    misjudge, ending with eggs just hitting the side and breaking.

-   When I make the sombrero model, I should also make sure it has the
    same *hitbox* as an actual sombrero. Why?

    -   The ends curl upward a bit on sombreros, which would help keep
        the eggs on your hat.

    -   The bulb in the center doesn't have perfectly vertical sides,
        they are more gradual, which *also* helps with controlling egg
        bounces.

-   Often, it feels like I'd want a way to deliver the egg *in the air*
    (like a hoop it should go through)

-   And that it might be more fun if the level *wraps around*: both eggs
    and players simply teleport to the opposite end when they reach the
    border.

The last thing I was constantly doubting was: "should the sombrero be
*high off the ground* (so that it stays above baskets and catches eggs
earlier) or *very low to the ground?*"

In the end, I took the second option. Otherwise, eggs that were already
low to the ground simply *could never be saved*. Additionally, the
higher your sombrero, the *harder* it was to gauge where it actually was
and how it would intercept the egg.

So, your character is now just this *tiny* cube, with the sombrero
directly on top of that :p

### Conclusions

**#1:** Yes, with a bigger sombrero, with a better hitbox, controlling
eggs is quite doable now.

**#2:** Level wrapping (things that go off at one side, reappear at the
other) was a great solution ... until I added the sombrero as a separate
physics object. Now I'd need to teleport *two bodies,* which are *linked
together* (with a "joint") ... yeah, that's asking for trouble.

I also planned a powerup where you could *throw* your sombrero, which
made the level wrapping definitely a bad idea.

I've given up on the idea of "randomly generated arenas" (so with the
egg baskets, cannons, etcetera at random locations).

**#3:** Instead, I will create ~5 hand-made arenas, where I manually
place everything and it's fixed. This way I can find creative, fitting
ways to add bounds to the level *and* add special rules and variety to
each arena.

**#4:** The sombrero is attached to your head with a loose joint. This
means it wobbles when you move (which is just fun), but it *also* means
that it realistically adds extra power to eggs!

(When they land on the sombrero, it dips down a bit, then shoots up,
adding extra force like a spring. The more an egg lands on the
*outside*, the more force is added -- again, because of the real-world
concept of *leverage*.)

So I'm definitely keeping that and making it a core part of the game.

**#5:** The sombrero *only* interacts with eggs. It can go through
terrain, egg baskets, other players, etcetera, without issue or
collision.

Why? Because you otherwise couldn't get anywhere (at least without
bumping into stuff and being stopped and having to jump your way
through). The game flows *so much better* when you can just position
your sombrero anywhere you want.

**#6:** Some of my powerups change physics on nearby eggs. The most
efficient way to do this (by far) is to use Godot's Areas for that and
turn on "space override" (with the new physics properties I want).
Holding the button? Turn override on. Released it? Turn it off again.

However, it wasn't working. And I couldn't for the life of me figure out
why.

Then I stumbled upon this comment by someone in the Q&A forums: *areas
are only updated when they are moved*. From my own tests, I'd concluded
that *areas are NOT updated when you change their space override (toggle
on/off).*

So I had to change it to the following: the area override is *always
on*. However, the *size* of the area is set to 0 when it's not active.
Additionally, whenever something changes (button press/release), I move
the area by a random (tiny) amount to force it to update.

A bit annoying that there's no clear documentation on this (or an easy
method to mark an area as "dirty"), but at least I figured it out.

{{< video src="vid4.webm" >}}
    A preview of one of the arenas: desert (when it didn't completely work yet)
{{< /video >}}

## Arenas

Okay, so, what do we have now?

-   A wide variety of eggs can appear

-   You can balance and push them quite well with your sombrero

-   They can be delivered into a basket or smashed to get some powerup.

This means that arenas are the final remaining "essential thing". (After
that, it's time to start looking at polish, such as sound effects,
prettier graphics, minor fixes, etcetera.)

As usual with these games, I wrote a list of "what each arena *needs* to
be good":

-   Unique color scheme and decorations. (Arenas should *look* and
    *feel* distinct.)

-   A natural way to block off the edges.

-   Either a special (general) rule ...

-   ... or a special way of delivering the eggs. (Just dropping
    identical egg baskets in every environment is not fitting nor
    interesting.)

And then I brainstormed until I had an answer to all of these questions.
It doesn't necessarily need to be a *good* answer or the *final* answer,
just something to try for now.

It yielded some interesting ideas for arenas ... just not sure if I have
the time (or 3D modeling skill) to pull it off :p

For example, I'm thinking of adding "Easter Island" (you know, with the
big stone faces dumped into the ground) and "Cloudy Babies" (set in the
clouds, storks holding towels/cloth, your egg must land in there).
Thematically speaking, awesome. Attainable? Not sure.

But the only way to find out is to keep working and see where we end up.

## Quality of Life

There are always many, many ways to make the game clearer and easier.
And they usually only pop up if you actually *test* and *play* the game
for quite some time (in different situations).

This is what I found:

-   We need an indicator on the ground that shows where an egg is going
    to fall.

-   Similarly, an indicator when an egg is off-screen.

-   We need outlines around eggs.

-   A ceiling is also necessary, otherwise eggs can fly *super high* and
    you never know when they crash back to earth.

-   An interactive menu would be great: one that teaches you how to move
    around, because you *need to move to a spot to start that level*.
    (It's more work than a traditional menu, but it's miles better. It
    means the game starts right when you launch it, not only after
    clicking some menus. It teaches the game, without taking extra time,
    or it feeling like a tutorial.)

## More Physics Annoyances

Today I implemented my special sombrero powerups: throw it like a
frisbee, put it at an angle, etcetera.

To do so, I need to

-   Destroy the joint that attaches the sombrero to the player

-   Position and rotate it correctly

-   Add the new joint (if needed)

Oh boy, this was a pain. The basic version was working within a minute:
create the specific joints (that attach sombrero + player) at runtime,
allow destroying the old one.

However ... this only worked when the player was at the perfect starting
position (0,0,0). And once a certain joint had been chosen, switching to
a new one later (by e.g. grabbing that powerup) created all sorts of
weird glitches.

**Remark:** I was also being stupid, as I forgot to write the line of
code to actually *remove* the old joint, instead of just *checking if
there was one*. That's why I was confused for 20 minute as to why joints
didn't do the very simple thing they were supposed to do: there were 2
or 3 joints acting on the body simultaneously.

In the end, it came down to what it always comes down to with physics:
they are updated in a *separate step*, which means it *might take a
frame (or two) before the physics are actually correct and lined up*.

So this is what I ended up doing:

-   Grabbed powerup? Remove the old joint, *plan* the next one => we
    wait a few frames

-   Check the *planned* joint

-   First, we position the sombrero correctly for this specific joint.
    (For example, the regular one is just at the top of our head, with
    no rotation) => we wait a few frames

-   Now create the joint and set the right parameters

Removing a joint takes a frame to update. Forcefully setting a physics
body position takes a frame to update. That's why there need to be
pauses between all these things.

I'm sure there is *some* way to just say "body.force_physics_update()"
to get it immediately, but I couldn't find it after searching for hours.
(If it's not there, it *should really be added*. At the same time,
there's probably a *reason* it's not implemented then ...)

Of course, if the player *moves* during those pauses ... the joint is
added at a slightly wrong position! So, while the joint is "settling"
(that's what I called it in the code), the player can't move or rotate.

This means you're locked for a few frames, but it's short enough to not
be noticeable.

(The alternative is *hard-resetting* the sombrero to the correct
location every few frames. But that's very resource intensive and opens
up many more troubles, so let's not do that.)

But, after all of this, we now have a bunch of fun powerups for
throwing, slanting, repositioning your sombrero. (And they all have some
wiggle room, so they look bouncy and react realistically to the eggs.)

## Nearing a playable game

### Menus

I decided to make the menu interactive. In fact, I decided to simply
make that "one of the arenas".

(So it's built from the same GridMap, follows the same physics rules,
etcetera. Only, instead of playing the game, you can log in walk to a
spot to load that level.)

This means that I just need to *make that arena* and add the
functionality to complete the "menus" part of the game.

(A specific button opens up *settings*, but that's basic stuff like
"Volume" and "Fullscreen". A pause menu in-game would be nice too, but
that also won't be much work.)

I'll start now, but obviously need to wait until I have all the arenas
to finish it, because at the moment I only have basic *grass* tiles.

### Solo Mode

Using custom-made arenas, means I can't really scale them based on
player count. That means I need to scale them *to allow 4 players at
most* ... which means it feels really big and empty when you're playing
single player. (And that makes it near impossible to play.)

That's why I decided to give you **two sombreros!**

On keyboard, you simply control the first with arrow keys, and the
second with WASD.

On controller, you get a button to *switch* between them. (Might also
allow moving the other with the right joystick, but not sure how easy
that is to execute for players.)

### Tutorial?

I decided to make the first arena a "training ground", based on my
experience creating multiplayer games the past few years. Yes, it feels
like a "boring" start, but I know it will be the "perfect" start for new
players.

This map has some rules and mechanics omitted:

-   Eggs *auto deliver*. If you can keep them in the air ( = so they
    don't break) for 10 seconds, they are delivered.

-   When eggs are broken, they *don't spawn powerups*. (In other words:
    special eggs and powerups are disabled.)

I'll make sure the maps are ordered and numbered so players will start
with the training ground.

The next map will then add some rules:

-   Eggs must be delivered into baskets.

-   Powerups spawn, *but* only a few simple egg types are enabled for
    the moment.

The map after that will add *more* unique eggs, and so on, increasing
difficulty as we go.

How are these things taught? Although relatively effective, I've grown
to despise hitting players with a "full screen image tutorial" at the
start of a new level/arena. It breaks the flow. They won't read it all.
(Probably, someone will skip it and say "heck, let's just play!")

Instead, each arena has a small image that appears when you come close.
It tells you:

-   The name

-   A thumbnail of what it (roughly) looks like

-   Any special rules or newly added mechanics to watch out for.

That's all the tutorial needed, and that's all you get.

### Some more help & variety

Although it's now quite doable to control the eggs and keep them from
breaking, this also means some of the *variety* and *challenge* is gone.

I realized I often *really* wanted to jump to an egg. Or dash towards
it. Things you only get when that powerup appears.

But ... we can also give this functionality to you *through level
design*!

If I simply place "trampolines" in the levels, you can use those for
some jumping. If I place "dash squares" in the levels that boost you in
that direction, you get the same idea.

This does mean, though, that levels get a bit fuller and shouldn't be so
flat.

The current method for checking "does an egg hit the ground?" was, well,
just a rectangle on the floor that checks if the egg hits it. That's not
possible anymore if the ground is all bumpy and uneven.

Instead, I'll change it to this:

-   There's a *separate* GridMap called "Floor".

-   Only eggs that hit the Floor are broken. (The other GridMap is used
    for the edges, environment, decorations, etcetera. No fun if those
    break eggs too.)

-   Additionally, they only break if the collision normal is pointing
    *upward.* (In other words, they fell down on it, instead of hitting
    e.g. the *side* of a tile, or a *ceiling* of something.)

It's not precise, but then again, physics games are never precise. There
will be eggs hitting the floor that *should* break, but they don't, and
vice versa. But if that only happens 1% of the time, we're fine.

## Some doubts

Right now, we have a perfectly playable game, with two arenas
(*training* and *forest*) and a menu.

But ... it's not great yet. Sometimes it's very boring (you're just
waiting for a few seconds until an egg finally comes down), at other
times it's near impossible (it's *really* hard to aim eggs and get them
where they need to go)

Another annoyance are the *edges* and *corners* of the map: eggs often
get a bit "stuck" there, and it takes a while before they're really sent
back into the level.

Here's how I sought to fix this:

-   I increased the gravity scale on eggs (from 1 to 2, to be specific).
    This made them fall down way quicker, which just feels better and a
    more accurate tempo. (To compensate, all bouncing forces on the eggs
    are stronger.)

-   The bouncing force on walls is *stronger* in the direction towards
    the center of the map. Basically, this direction is artificially
    made more important in the physics.

-   The bump in the middle of the sombrero was increased in height and
    width, allowing you to catch and steer eggs more.

-   Delivery locations for eggs have a slight *force field* around them,
    pulling eggs into it.

-   I should design maps to always have *something* in the corners to
    prevent eggs getting stuck there. Something as simple as a tree, or
    a slanted stone, would make the bounces more varied and towards the
    center of the level.

Although these are great improvements, it does feel a bit like applying
band-aids.

Maybe I should rethink the core idea of the game and be a bit smarter
about that. Some ideas:

-   Not necessarily an *easier* way to deliver, but more *consistent*
    and something you can improve at over time.

-   Start off with *easier* shapes to work with, like a perfect sphere
    or a cube?

-   Different methods of delivery: the easiest one is *really easy*, but
    only gives 1 point. Harder ones give more points.

-   An extra rule about how *often* an egg bounced? Or how many
    different *players* it touched? (For example: an egg can only be
    delivered after X bounces. Or it becomes worth more over time.) => a
    good idea, but it would be too much for beginners to learn, so it'd
    need to come in a later arena anyways

## A quick playtest

I was able to do a (very quick, 15 minute) playtest with someone else.
These were the results:

-   Yes, very fun game, easy to explain and start playing! (And making
    the extra button an optional thing that appears later was also
    great.)

-   But ... just slightly too hard to deliver the eggs and control them.

-   If I don't manage to make this easier/faster, I'll have to lower the
    number of eggs needed. (First arena took 4 minutes to clear, second
    11 minutes. For games like these, 5 minutes per level seems to be
    the sweet spot.)

-   (And some stupid major issues because I left in debugging code from
    a few days ago :p)

It just made me realize that controlling the egg will always be a bit
chaotic, no matter how big I make the sombrero, or which shape I pick.
That's what you get with realistic physics and lots of sloped shapes
(like, you know, eggs).

So instead of trying to fix things this way, we just need to explore
different routes:

-   Make delivering easier: bigger locations, easier to reach, more of a
    safety net around them.

-   Introduce other elements (unique player roles, environment, etc.)
    that are a *certain* way to keep an egg safe or send it somewhere.

I've learned that it's useless to try and predict (or logically reason)
what will work best for your game. So I'm just going to implement a
bunch of things and see what feels best.

-   Swapping the eggs with other shapes => mostly spheres and cubes are
    more predictable

-   Making eggs bigger/smaller => the current size was randomly chosen,
    maybe the game is much more fun in a different scale

-   Making the egg baskets way bigger => smaller ones still exist and
    they yield more points per egg. (I've created 1x1, 1x2 and 2x2
    variations.)

-   Replacing the baskets with *holes in the ground* or *hoops in the
    air*.

**Remark:** I also added a "keep inside" body on top of the baskets.
This is a one-way body, which means once an egg goes through it, it
can't get out again. This nicely keeps delivered eggs inside the basket,
no matter the rotation, no matter the speed of the egg. Makes a huge
difference for such a simple thing.

## Results from trying stuff

**Observation #1:** yes, delivery locations matter a lot.

-   Making them bigger makes the game considerably less frustrating

-   Instead of placing them *on top of* the terrain, it's much better to
    have them as a *hole in the ground* or *in the air*. Why? When on
    top of the terrain, they restrict the space (can't walk through
    them), and any egg that's close to the ground is basically
    impossible to deliver. In a game where stuff falls down to the
    ground, it feels only logical to place the destination *in the
    ground*.

-   The "force field" around egg baskets is *great* ... but it needs
    some finetuning, as it's now sometimes *too* obvious (or doesn't
    help at all).

-   Making "easy" and "hard" baskets, with different point values, is
    also great. Ensures people can play according to their skill level.
    Gives an interesting choice, rather than letting the *egg* randomly
    lead you somewhere. And just makes sense, as not every location is
    equal. (And somehow makes the level look better ... more focused, or
    something.)

**Observation #2:** yes, different shapes (such as a perfect sphere) are
easier to control ... but that's all there is to it. It doesn't make the
game more interesting or fun. It also makes it harder to see what *type*
something is.

-   But, to implement this, I made a general script that could swap the
    egg shapes to anything I want, at any time.

-   So I tested *mini eggs* and *huge eggs*. They were both quite fun,
    in their own ways! The huge egg provided a great amount of clarity
    and consistency, so they might become the default.

**Observation #3:** one of my ideas was to set the sombrero at an
*angle* by default.

It's already a powerup, but I thought it might be a good default
setting, as it helps you *steer* the eggs. (As opposed to a flat
sombrero that just bounces it up again.)

But ... it's too strong. It makes the game more difficult overall (if a
slanted sombrero is all you have) and looks ... wrong.

So, instead, I loosened the joint between player and sombrero. It can
now angle much more (as a reaction to eggs, or your walking) which
accomplishes the same thing: it will frequently be at an angle.

Also makes the game more fun, more lively, and helps steer eggs in
specific directions.

**Observation #4:** I also happened to see another game (where things
flew through the air, in 3D) which did something I hadn't thought about:
show a *white dotted line* from the thing to the ground. (So perfectly
vertical.) This is a *great idea*, as it gives players a much better
sense of where something is going to land, and where it is in space.

Adding a *visual guide* like this (without changing actual gameplay)
also made the game easier.

So maybe I'm going at this the wrong way: instead of constantly trying
new gameplay stuff, I should just focus on giving *as many visual
guides* as possible?

## More Arenas

With my gameplay worries *sort-of* soothed at this point, it was time to
finish the content for the game:

-   The last powerups ( = egg types)

-   Actual menus and UI for everything

-   And more arenas.

Things to keep in mind:

-   Place delivery locations *inside the ground* (like holes) or *on the
    walls* (in the air)

-   Place stuff in corners to prevent things from getting trapped there.

After a few days, I'm now able to say something about that process.

I ... was very tired (worked *a lot* the past year), didn't feel
motivated, and was frustrated by my lack of 3D modeling skills and weird
physics bugs that kept happening.

So I *did* finish most arenas (5 of them in the end), but I wouldn't say
I'm extremely proud of the work or the game in general.

I also made a unique soundtrack for each arena. (A unique melody of 1-2
minutes that loops in the background.) I actually wanted to be a
musician when I was young, so even though I'm not that experience with
mixing/recording music, *writing* some good songs comes very naturally
to me.

And that's when my time was basically up.

-   I had to finish the marketing side (basic logo, screenshots, game
    page)

-   I had to finish the menu so that each arena could actually be chosen
    (and you saw a preview)

-   I had to fix some leftover bugs or frustrations. (Such as a specific
    powerup not working consistently.)

-   And the game had 0 particles or animations at this point, so I had
    to add at least some of those.

To finish the devlog, I will therefore state the lessons I learned and
how this game could be improved.

![The first version of the interactive main menu](vid4.webm)

## Lessons for the Future

### Lesson #1

**Lesson #1:** **mind your perspective.** Because this game is in 3D
(whilst all my previous games were 2D), I was constantly surprised by
how hard it was to see something. I had to re-do many models,
placements, sprites, UI just to make sure it was all visible from the
perspective (and zoom level) we were at.

You just can't think in the same way as 2D. I'm starting to grasp the
basics of 3D modelling and level design, but still not really there yet
...

### Lesson #2

**Lesson #2: actually design your levels *while implementing mechanics*
(and before *making models for them*).**

I thought it would be smart to code and test/balance the mechanics
first, and then build arenas around that.

But, as it turns out, you just don't *know* if your mechanics are fun
and balanced and flexible enough, *if you don't have real levels to
properly test them*.

So the balance (in speed, power, bounces, level size, etcetera) is all
just based on my default test level, which was just a grey plane of a
random size. When I started creating later arenas, I constantly noticed
I wanted more space, and I should've included mechanics to keep eggs
"safe" for some time *or* teleport across the map, and that my
requirements had changed.

The reason I immediately started making models when creating new arenas,
was simply because of the game jam time restriction. It's better to
first sketch the arenas (manually, or with grey cubes and spheres), test
them, and only create the final models and textures when you're
satisfied.

### Lesson #3

**Lesson #3: 3D is still hard and not that suited for a "short game".**
Even though I've designed my workflow to be very efficient (which also
comes with experience), I still spent *way* more time on this game than
I wanted. And most of it had to do with the simple fact that it was 3D,
so the models took longer, there were more settings/dimensions/physics
issues to work out, etcetera.

Everything is just *longer* and *more difficult* than 2D, which means
even the simplest of game ideas will probably take longer than you want.

Even though I want to grow my 3D skills and work towards full-blown 3D
titles in the future, I might stick with 2D for now, especially on my
"game jam" or "one week game" projects.

### Lesson #4

Well, here I just want to put my thoughts for a possible "improved
version" of the game.

-   More life and variation to the arenas. (The models there are only
    *bare bones*. The essentials for functionality. None of it moves or
    is animated. Only a few variations.)

-   Bigger arenas (only slightly).

-   To compensate, give players a way to combat the space: move faster,
    teleporters, keep eggs safe, delay the arrival of eggs (by turning
    off a cannon, for example)

    -   This could be built into the arenas

    -   Or additional "rules" or "player roles" within the game

-   Better UI, sprites, and helpers to show the *type* of an egg or
    powerup. And where it is or where it's going to come from.

-   Movable obstacles within the level: ramps to deflect eggs, pillows
    to catch them before they break, a bowl to just collect eggs.

    -   I really wanted this from the get-go, as I think it'd be a great
        addition, but didn't have the time :(

-   An actual loss condition (or more interesting win condition). Due to
    the jam being about positivity, there is no way to lose and breaking
    eggs is actually quite a good thing. But that *does* destroy much of
    the challenge ...

I think this game could be a really strong party game (local
multiplayer, 1-4 players) that sells for 5-10 bucks. But for that to be
the case, a *significant* redesign would be needed, and I'd need to
*significantly* improve my 3D modeling and general design skills.

As I already said, I'm quite tired of working very hard this year (on
many big game projects), and the amount of hills to climb for this game
is a bit too much.

So don't expect this improved version immediately after the end of the
game jam. But there's a good chance it'll come, in 6 or 12 months time.

**Remark:** I only just realized ... the solution to my "eggs and
players get stuck in corners" issue ... is simply to eliminate corners
entirely xD How did I not think of that sooner?! Just make the levels
circular! Well, way too late now, but in the improved version I will
certainly do that.

**Remark (one day later):** yeah, now the solutions are coming. Too
late, brain! The arenas should have been *egg-shaped*, obviously, and
*sitting on top of a sombrero*. Extremely thematical, and would solve
almost all issues I had.

## Conclusion

That's it for the *game jam* version of this game. If I make the
improved version, it'll get its own devlog, as I imagine the amount of
work (and significant changes) is big enough to warrant it.

Hopefully it was fun or interesting to read. Tried the game? Let me know
what you think.

Until the next devlog,

Pandaqi
